# Scheduler

The role of the **kube-scheduler** is to assign new workload objects, such as pods, to nodes. During the scheduling process, decisions are made based on current [[Computing/DevOps/Kubernetes/Kubernetes]] [[Computing/DevOps/Kubernetes/Cluster/Cluster]] state and new object's requirements. The scheduler obtains from the [[etcd]] data store, via the [[API Server]], resource usage data for each worker node in the [[Computing/DevOps/Kubernetes/Cluster/Cluster]]. The scheduler also receives from the [[API Server]] the new object's requirements which are part of its configuration data. Requirements may include constraints that users and operators set, such as scheduling work on a node labeled with **disk == ssd** key/value pair. The scheduler also takes into account Quality of Service (QoS) requirements, data locality, affinity, anti-affinity, taints, toleration, [[Computing/DevOps/Kubernetes/Cluster/Cluster]] topology, etc. Once all the [[Computing/DevOps/Kubernetes/Cluster/Cluster]] data is available, the scheduling algorithm filters the nodes with predicates to isolate the possible node candidates which then are scored with priorities in order to select the one node that satisfies all the requirements for hosting the new workload. The outcome of the decision process is communicated back to the [[API Server]], which then delegates the workload deployment with other control plane agents. 

The scheduler is highly configurable and customizable through scheduling policies, plugins, and profiles. Additional custom schedulers are also supported, then the object's configuration data should include the name of the custom scheduler expected to make the scheduling decision for that particular object; if no such data is included, the default scheduler is selected instead.

A scheduler is extremely important and complex in a multi-node [[Computing/DevOps/Kubernetes/Kubernetes]] [[Computing/DevOps/Kubernetes/Cluster/Cluster]]. In a single-node [[Computing/DevOps/Kubernetes/Kubernetes]] [[Computing/DevOps/Kubernetes/Cluster/Cluster]], such as the one explored later in this course, the scheduler's job is quite simple.